2026-01-02 — OS‑Independent Troubleshooting

Topic: OS‑Independent Troubleshooting
Resource (video): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PC5V8_UBX8w  
TryHackMe room: Intro to Cyber Security — https://tryhackme.com/room/intro-to-cyber-security  
Duration: 2 hours

Objective
Brief: Independent troubleshooting of windows
In case of Blue Screen of death (BSOD):Causes; Bad Hardware, Bad Drivers, Bad Application.

Resolution: 

Use last known good login, Use system Restore back to previous configuration,or if you just installed a driver then you should try rolling back to the previous version.
Remove hardware recently installed to check for resolution. 

Check task manager: For high CPU usage and I/O.
Check windows Update.

Antivirus Scan.

In cases of an "Oerating system not found" : Possible cause; Multible OS intsalled.
The boot loader has probably not launched the propper Os.
Check all boot drive correction, Remove USbB devices.
Manually reconfigue your system through the windows boot configuration Database (BCD). Found the recovery console.
In the recovery console, run the command; bootre/rebuildbcd.
This rebuilds the boot configuration database and the next time the system boots, it will use the new DB to find the proper windows partition.

Incase of a missing NTLDR (when the proper bootloader is missing);
Run startup repair / manually replace manually and reboot.
Disconnect removable media. (USB, etc)

Missing operating system (Boot Configuration Data may be incorrect);
Run Startup repair
manually configure BCD store.

Boot to safe mode (Windows not starting normally): Run startup repair.

Device not starting:
Check device manager and event viewer
Often a bad driver(Replace or remove driver)

One or more windows services failing to start:
Start service manually from service optoon
Check service permission
Check service dependencies
Check system files incase of windows services
For application service: Reinstall application.

When an application malfunctions or disappers, (Eg. Internet explorer has stopped working)

Check event logs
Check reliability monitor (History of application problems, helps with resolution) Go to control panel-All control panel items-Security and maintenance-reliability monitor.
Re-install or install a latest version.

Incase of low memory:
Closing apps using a lot of memory (View from memory tab)
Increase virtual memory (from task manager, move to the memory tab)
(how to access the memory tab: System, About, Advanced system setting, performance, setting, virtual memory...you can change it to be automatically set or change it to the actual memory to be used.)

If USB contains buffers called endpoints( USB controllers have different endpoints, ranging from 96-254, etc):
Or if notification says "Controller does not have enough resources for this device;
1. Move device to a different USB interface. (USB 2.0 supports larger number of endpoints.
2. Match USB interface to device capabilities. Eg. USB 2.X to USB 2.X interface.

General system failures:
Full system diagnostics ( Check hardwares, softwares,)
Check operating system
Run Anti-malware scan
Analysis on imported system files.

Drifting computer Clock:
Enable automatic time setting (settings, time and language, update time, set time automatically. 



Environment / Tools
- Browser, TryHackMe AttackBox
- Commands used:

Screenshots
- See "Assets"

Lessons Learned & Next Steps
-Popular Tool Suites Basics 
