2026-01-06 — Operating Systems ( Windows Basics) + Wireless Technologies
Topic: Operating Systems ( Windows Basics) + Wireless Technologies
Resource (video):https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ka7VoWf_aSI&list=PLarzZ7tJk-lFpARjZboFkb0vTV_kLLhN3
TryHackMe room: Intro to Cyber Security — https://tryhackme.com/room/intro-to-cyber-security  
Duration: 2 hours

Objective
Brief: 
OS - A software that acts as a bridge between the computer hardware and the user applications.
Manages hadware resources, provides a user interface and enables application execution.

Key Functions of OS
Hardware Management: Manages computer hardware like the CPU, memroy and Storage.

User Interface: Provides way for user to interact with the computer.

Process Management: Handles multitasksing and runs programs simultaneously.

File Management: Organising, storing , retrieval & manipulating files and folders on the storage devices.

Examples of operating systems:

1. Windows: used in most personal computers and laptops.
2. macOs: Runs on Apple's hardware
3. Linux: Open source Os with various distribution like ubuntu and Fedora. ( Linux is like a large family of cars with each having their specifics, eg. Mercedes has G-wagon, GLE, etc. 
In this case the types of the destribution of the linux is Ubuntu, Fedora, etc.
4. Android: Powers smartphones, tablets, other mobile devices. 

Batches of Operatings Systems:
1. Early Operating Systems - Batch processing with minimal user interraction.
2. Command - Line Interface - User interraction through commands.
3. Graphical User Interface (GUI) - Comes with visual elements for easier user navigation.
4. Modern Operating Systems: Supports multitasking, networking, security features, etc.


Components of An Os

Kernel- The heart or the core part that communicates between the hardware and software. Handles request back and forrth and makes sure all is running smoothly.
User Interface - Provides Interraction between users and system (GUI or commands).
File System: Managing all files, folders and data on storage devices.
Device Drivers: Software components that facilitate communication between hardware components and the OS.
Utilities: Tools for copying, editing and scanning files.
Processes: Runing programs or tasks running on the system.
Memory management: Tracking memory in the system for efficient use and prevent conflicts between processes.
Networking: Allows device to connect and share info over networks.
Security and Access control: Measures to protect system data, includes authentication, authorization, encryption and firewall setting.
User Management: Manages user accounts and permissions, controlling who can or cannot access the system and what they can do. 


Bluetooth:
A low power wireless technology that uses a short-range radio that provides a way to connect nearby devices to each other.
For exchanging data.
Very resistant to interferance as compared to wifi.

NFC:
Near field Communication. A technology built into modern smartphone, computers electronics that allows
the transfer of data between devices that are very close to each other without the need for internet connection.
Found in some smart phones. Can be found in credit cards but in this, they cannot be connected to any devise. 




WiFi:

Wireless technology that uses radiowaves to allow devices to be connected to the internet.
This is done using a wifi router.
For connecting devices to the internet.
Vulnerable to intereference.


Environment / Tools
- Browser, TryHackMe AttackBox
- Commands used: (none for this theoretical session)

Notes / Steps
- Confidentiality = ...
- Integrity = ...
- Availability = ...
- Example: Ransomware attacks impact Availability — e.g., sample notes...

Screenshots
- `assets/2025-12-01-cia-1.png` (screenshot of TryHackMe completion)
- `assets/2025-12-01-cia-2.png` (if any)

Findings / Key Points
- 3 bullets summarizing what you learned and one question if any.

Defensive Notes / Remediation
- For defenders: enable backups and offline copies to protect Availability; use MFA to protect Confidentiality; use checksums/detection for Integrity.

Lessons Learned & Next Steps
- What to study next (e.g., "Tomorrow: Linux fundamentals")
